Introduction
At the beginning of the second century ad, in the reign of the
emperor Trajan, a group of young men could be found studying
philosophy at a boarding school in Nicopolis, a Roman colony in
Epirus (north-west Greece). They were students of Epictetus. In a
prefatory letter one such pupil, Arrian by name (c. AD 86-160), takes
credit for committing a sizeable number of Epictetus’ lessons to
print, thereby ensuring their survival. These are the Discourses.
Arrian is also credited with preparing a digest of his master’s
thought: the Manual or (in Greek) Enchiridion. A modest number of
fragments attributed to Epictetus have also come down to us (some
of them derived from Discourses otherwise lost, as only four books
of the eight that Arrian originally published are extant).
Besides being an uncommonly diligent stenographer, Arrian was
an author in his own right, best known for his biography of
Alexander the Great. He was also a man of the world, a Roman
consul and later legate to the Roman province of Cappadocia.
Taking into account his own literary aspirations, and the formidable
challenge posed by transcribing Epictetus’ lectures ‘live’, i.e. as they
were being delivered, some have questioned whether his opening
letter is completely trustworthy in characterizing the collection as
nothing less than a verbatim record of what the philosopher said,
inside and outside the classroom. Most students of the Discourses
incline to the view that, in the process of e ecting the transition of
Epictetus’ lectures to print, Arrian probably permitted himself a few
editorial changes. Establishing the dramatic context of the
Discourses, in imitation of Plato’s Socratic dialogues, may be one of
his contributions. But any alterations or ‘improvements’ he made to
the text are unlikely to have been extensive. The books of history
and geography that Arrian wrote later are so unlike the Discourses in

style and content that, even if we did not have his word for it, we
would be unlikely to conclude that they were products of the same
hand. Arrian published his edition of the Discourses soon after
Epictetus died, and an unauthorized edition had already been in
circulation; so other of Epictetus’ students were in a position to
judge how faithful Arrian was to the actual words of the master; and
we have no record of anyone impugning their essential honesty. On
the contrary, Arrian’s collection was accepted immediately as an
authentic and de nitive record of Epictetus’ thought, and even
though Arrian was responsible for actually writing the book,
Epictetus is conventionally, and rightly, treated as their author.
Even if we cannot be sure that Epictetus actually said everything
attributed to him in the Discourses, or in those exact words, we have
no reason to doubt that the bulk of the material does derive from
what Arrian and others heard while seated at the master’s feet.

BIOGRAPHY
Details of Epictetus’ life are sketchy; the Discourses themselves are
our richest source of information. We can only make an educated
guess as to the year he was born and the year he died, but are not
likely to be far wrong in giving his dates as c.AD 55–135. We know
that he was born into slavery because he tells us so, and from an
ancient inscription we learn that his mother had been a slave. The
place of his birth was Hierapolis, a major Graeco-Roman city in
what today is south-western Turkey. The native language there was
Greek – the Koine or ‘common’ Greek that derived from the
language of classical Athens, but became widely disseminated in a
simpli ed form during the Hellenistic era. The Discourses are a
principal source for our knowledge of Koine Greek (as is the Greek
New Testament, to cite another example).
More than once Epictetus refers to himself as ‘a lame old man’,
but nowhere elaborates on the cause of his disability. Two traditions

independent of the Discourses give competing accounts. Early
Christian authors report that a sadistic master was responsible for
rendering him crippled for life. But others interpret ‘lame old man’
as almost a pleonastic phrase, which is to say that he may have
su ered from rheumatism or arthritis as a natural consequence of
advancing age. The latter explanation is in fact the more likely. We
know who his owner was; his name was Epaphroditus, and Epictetus
makes mention of him several times, not exactly in complimentary
terms, but not with any hint of bitterness either. Epaphroditus is
famous for more than just being Epictetus’ master. A former slave
himself, after manumission he rose to the position of Nero’s
secretary in charge of petitions; later he would serve Domitian in
the same capacity. Descriptions of life at court frequently appear in
the Discourses, in terms detailed and vivid enough to suggest that his
service to Epaphroditus acquainted Epictetus at rst hand with the
manners, routines and attitudes of the emperor and his courtiers.
We can go further and speculate that in this equivocal position – a
slave on the one hand, but also a privileged member of the
emperor’s inner circle – Epictetus came to appreciate in full the
ambiguities of power, and learned to distinguish real freedom from
counterfeit. This dialectic of freedom and slavery colours much of
his presentation of Stoic thought.
That Epaphroditus allowed Epictetus considerable freedom of
movement and association is implied by his attendance at the
lectures of Musonius Rufus. Tacitus, a contemporary Roman
historian (c.AD 56-c. 117), describes Musonius as the foremost Stoic
of his day. We are fortunate that a sample of his lectures was
included in an anthology of morally edifying readings, known as the
Suda, which still survives. Musonius gives lessons in practical ethics,
on particular questions such as whether women should be allowed
to study philosophy, and what relationship ideally obtains between
a husband and wife. While he does not engage the same topics,
Epictetus in his Discourses displays a similar focus and orientation.
Both men concentrate on ethics to the virtual exclusion of physics
(cosmological speculation) and logic. Logic and physics feature in

the Discourses, to be sure, but typically in an ancillary or illustrative
role. And neither one gets caught up in ethical theorizing; they
always treat ethics with a view to applying it in real life. Reading
books and becoming uent in the doctrines of philosophers are
deprecated as ends in themselves. Even more than Musonius,
Epictetus has a plain and practical agenda: he wants his students to
make a clean break with received patterns of thinking and behaving,
to reject popular morality and put conventional notions of good and
bad behind them; in short, he aims to inspire in his readers
something like a religious conversion, only not by appeal to any
articles of faith or the promise of life in the hereafter (Stoics did not
believe in the afterlife), but by appeal to reason alone.
Epaphroditus granted Epictetus his freedom – precisely when we
don’t know – but from then on he devoted his life to the practice
and preaching of philosophy. When Domitian, suspecting them of
republican sympathies, in ad 95 ordered all the philosophers in Italy
to pack up and leave, Epictetus turned this insult to account by
moving to Greece and founding his school there (in a spot where he
had probably little to fear in the way of competition). Nicopolis, the
site he chose, was a Roman colony founded by the emperor
Augustus to commemorate his victory over Antony and Cleopatra. It
functioned as the de facto capital of the province of Epirus. The site
had other advantages; it was on the Adriatic coast, making it easy of
access for prospective students from Italy. The student body drew
mainly from upper-class Roman families who admired Greek culture
and were particularly keento taste of the accumulated wisdom of
the Greek philosophers. We have no information as to how long
students typically stayed at Nicopolis under Epictetus’ tutelage, but
it was probably no more than a year or two. The school, in any case,
was a success, and when its reputation attracted the attention of the
emperor Hadrian (more kindly disposed toward philosophy than his
predecessor), he honoured it, and its founder, with a personal visit.
Tradition has it that late in life Epictetus retired from teaching
introduction and withdrew to the peace and quiet of family life,
under conditions imposed by old age: that is, he became a parent by

adopting rather than fathering a child, and took into his home a
female servant to serve as a kind of surrogate mother to the child
and domestic servant for himself. That he had absented himself from
family life for so long shows that he regarded philosophy as a
jealous mistress who demanded practically all his time and
attention, which family life would not allow. That this renunciation
of family life represented a real sacri ce is suggested by the fact that
he took to it immediately upon retiring. He evidently thought he
had earned the comforts of home after devoting most of his life to
improving the lives of others – the successive generations of
students who had passed through his school. We have no more news
of Epictetus beyond this. After creating this version of a family he
was evidently content to settle into it and live out the balance of his
years in obscurity.